for all of AMD's self-created
controversy recently the AMD Rison 330
300 x remains a good cpu it just
launched its $120 and unfortunately for
Andy in some ways it's been very
overshadowed by the 400 series chipset
discussion that's available separately
from this topic so today we're looking
at the r3 3,300 X and specifically at
what point does it begin to bottleneck
the GPU so how high up the GPU stack can
you purchase before your CPU is limiting
you to an extent that you've wasted your
money that's what we're looking at and
the r3 we've already said it's taken the
a blank is enough for gaming ground
where an r3 is now enough for gaming
much like an i5 was once enough for
gaming back until up until probably
about the 6600 K era maybe a little bit
before that but around then was when we
lasted that before that this video is
brought to you by CD projekt red and the
cyberpunk 2077 PC modding contest the
cyberpunk 2077 team is hosting a case
modding contest that gives winners the
opportunity to work with professional
case modders to build the ultimate
system you don't have to do any physical
modding to enter the contest just a
mock-up with three views of the mod the
theme is the future is recyclable and it
should be inspired by cyber Punk which
has countless sources of influence for
the work the contest ends on May 17th
and cyberpunk steam will select 5
winners to partner with pro case motors
to make it a reality
use any tools you want to make the
mock-up of a cyberpunk themed build
featuring a waste or recycled materials
and then submit images to the team learn
more and enter the contest using the
link in the description below or go to
cyberpunk net
cyber up what's also interesting here is
that there's been a bit of a paradigm
shift where previously you might buy
something like an i7 CPU and a lower end
GPU with the intent to later upgrade the
GPU because the video card is the more
upgradable the - it's just PCIe or AGP
as it may be and the CPU often involved
a motherboard switch so provided you're
buying a 3300 X even if Xen 3 doesn't
exist and it stops here you still have
good upgrade pathways way up the stack
whereas Intel it kind of stopped at an
i7 until you got you got into a GD t so
back to that discussion point of the
paradigm shift we're looking at a
scenario where it might actually make
sense to buy an r3 3300 ax if you're
just gaming and ignore the other
workstation use case for a moment and
get a higher end GPU 2070 super maybe
2080 super and consider later upgrade
into a 3600 if you come across some
money in a year from now and you can
afford whatever those might be priced at
the time so that's where it gets really
interesting as opposed to the previous
method of high-end CPU and skimp on the
GPU if you really have to budget
somewhere and you don't want just
straight balance with say my 5 and a
mid-range GPU so the content-type today
we are using our GPU testing bench we
haven't officially unveiled this test
methodology yet but it's pretty similar
to our CPU test methodology uses mostly
the same games except we've cranked up
the graphics settings on them because
it's testing the GPUs this part though
we're looking just at the 3300 acts
we've left our standardized GPU bench
platform CPU in there which is in 8086
kf5 gigahertz for most of these charts
and that's just there to give you a
sense of where's the actual cut off at
what points is the 3300 X and limiting
the xx atti
as opposed to is it actually the xx atti
as bottlenecks so we've left that on
there for it but it's not meant to be an
ad 86 caver says 3300 extra view you can
go watch our CPU review if you want CPU
comparisons we're going to be looking at
games from 1080p to 4k the intent of
that is to see how the scaling changes
as we increase the GPU load increase the
bandwidth requirements and decrease the
CPU load and again the point of tasking
CPUs with the best GPU is that you don't
want to constraint because when you're
saying CPU a is 20% better than CPU B if
that 20% is being capped by something
else it's not really genuine now we do
have some GPU constrained benches in our
CPU suite because people always ask okay
what's the real-world version for gaming
with higher settings so we leave one or
two of those in there but this is
looking at basically only that scenario
except sometimes at 1080p with certain
games so enough of that let's get into
the benchmarks and show you at what
point does the 3300 ex full stock
constrain the GPU if you want to know
the memory settings all that stuff that
we use for the
go watch our sea view methodology video
or read the article it's all in there
it's all the same as our CPU reviews but
the games have changed completely with
much higher settings we'll start with
the division - at 1080p and using high
settings for more of a GPU bond which is
realistic - how most people play games
the r3 3,300 X does eventually hit a
limit on the 20 atti unsurprisingly
otherwise the CB reviews wouldn't have
much point since all the CPUs would look
identical with a lower end part even
still it's impressive how far the other
parts scale the RT X xx atti coupled
with our GPU test bench platform a 5
gigahertz 8086 K and about 202 FPS
average that's only 8% ahead of the
3,300 X to the 28 eti illustrating that
the cpu limitation doesn't kick in until
pretty late frame time consistency isn't
too restricted or at least not
disproportionately so as represented by
the 1% and 0.1% low numbers that are
shown the RT x 2070 super is not limited
by the CPU here and max is at 142 FPS
average under the 3,300 X you'd get full
performance in this title out of a 2070
super the RT X 2060 KO the 1650 super
and the 5600 XD poles are all
constrained by two factors one the CPU
obviously and to the overhead present in
AMD CPUs with GPUs where there's an
inherent decrease in maximum potential
versus Intel this is illustrated by our
8086 k5 gigahertz result with the ko at
114 FPS average versus 1/10 of the 3300
x + KO this isn't something you really
need to worry about too much because in
this instance in terms of raw percentage
difference or perceivable difference
there's not much of one so far this is a
strong start you don't need to be too
worried about pairing any of these cards
with a 3300 X even though xx atti but we
wouldn't recommend that for a number of
other reasons
here's 1440p the results will obviously
get even closer together we already had
the settings at high so now we're 20
atti maxes out at 135 FPS average on the
3300 X that leads to the 2070 super by
37% as opposed to 32% at 1080p
the lower end GPUs are clearly the bind
more than the CPU and so at this point
you can just reference our GPU
benchmarks to determine which makes the
most sense now what you're looking for
is not a CPU benchmark if you're looking
at there's a low around cards it's a GPU
benchmark that's why we test each of
them
with a discrete choice for the opposite
compiler can component so GPU benchmark
use is high in CPU see the benchmark use
a high on GPU as for reasons like this
you need to use both of them to pick the
right part 26 TKO 5600 XC 2070 super and
62 T super are all fully enabled here
with only the 20 ATT I experienced in a
cap the 3300 acts scales better than we
might typically expect once GPU bound
and it's not surprising when the cpu
isn't as strained but even still we've
historically seen the lower and $100
CPUs hit limits closer to an RT X 2060
this shows the advancement and
performance of the low-end rise in CPUs
it feeds it well to our statement that
an r3 is now enough for gaming much like
the i-5 once was 4k monitors are cheap
these days will link one in the
description and so it's not uncommon for
someone on a budget to still be able to
afford a 4k display if you are playing
at 4k the 2080 CI caps at 82 FPS average
on our unconstrained 8086 K at 5
gigahertz the delta between this and the
3300 x is about 4 FPS average which
amounts more to overhead than it does to
strict cpu speed advantage this is
outside of run to run variance and is
repeatable the lows are functionally the
same there's no appreciable difference
between these two results to a human
player despite presenting a measurable
difference
the 2080 ti leads the 2070 superest at
the 4 FPS average result by about 42%
that gap is widening as the GP load
grows especially as bandwidth demands
increase everything up until a 28 ET i
would technically make sense here again
we don't recommend such a dramatic price
imbalance as a $120 CPU and a $1,250 GPU
but technically it is running tomb
raider with dx12 is next in this
benchmark the cpu is a clear bond the
8086 KF 5 gigahertz capped at 163 FPS
average with low at 109 and critically
96 FPS 0.1% is what we're looking at for
the last constrained solution those are
highly consistent numbers and indicate
that we shouldn't have any frame time
spikes that are massive since there's no
distortion of the data the 88 is 6k with
the 28 ET i illustrates minimally a
19.2% higher ceiling another 3300 ex
would allow so if you needed further
evidence beyond being a reasonable human
being to not pair these two dichotomous
parts together
this should be it the 2070 super
occasionally gets its highs shaved off
by the CPU but it's otherwise within
capabilities at 125 FPS average the 2060
ko is the more sensible choice with the
8086 k it does 105 FPS average with
stronger lows than the r3 3300 x
produces the 3300 ax has some overhead
its dealing with once again but it's
also a slower CPU the former impacts the
average and the peak the latter impacts
the latency you could scale up to a 20
60 ko a 2060 super 5700 xt or 2070 super
and have most of the performance
available to you that the card would
offer
here's 1440p for this one this ceiling
is 128 FPS average on the 8086 k where
the 2080 TI is completely maxed out
we're still far away from a CPU bind at
this point the 3300 ex is leveraging
most of what the 2080 TI affords it
surprisingly we still wouldn't recommend
it especially since it does become
capped in some situations like 1080p and
that would cross into other titles that
are more CPU dependent the 2070 super
seems a good maximum fit although the
$300 price bracket cards from AMD and
NVIDIA alike are the more price
conscious Association we think the 1650
super is - constrains to be an ideal
pairing but you certainly don't have to
worry about it limiting the CPU so
that's the upside at 4k the gap narrows
as it should the 3300 ex is still not
fully tapping the potential the 2080 ti
despite no longer being anywhere close
to a bottleneck on the GPU other than
the overhead the 2080 ti leads the 2070
super between the 3300 acts results by
35%
so there's technically still room in
there if you're running your games at
higher settings now naturally this gap
would narrow if we ran it on our CPU
bench instead which is designed to
stress the CPU but for people who tend
to run games at higher settings to load
their GPU more heavily because you want
it to look nice this is similar scaling
to what you can expect if you're more of
a super high FPS player who wants 144 or
higher for the for the framerate then at
that point you are tending to lean
towards more of looking at CPU
benchmarks rather than this or a GP
benchmark although that's important to
just buy the best one everyone 2019 is
next which
more of a sieve you bind than the other
games we've tested in our GP bench suite
the 8086 k5 gigahertz result is 213 FPS
average with a lows at 153 and 98 the
3300 ex drags that down to 192 FPS
average allowing the less cap to 8086 k
elite of 12% the 2080 TI on 3300 AK
still leads the 2070 super by 24% you
could buy a higher end card and almost
fully leverage it here at 1440p of the
scale shrinks to a 170 FPS average cap
on the 8086 k or 156 FPS average on the
3300 x that's still a 9.3 percent lead
remember though this isn't about
comparing the 8086 k to 3300 x we
already have a cpu review if you want to
compare the CPUs it's just there for
perspective the 2070 super runs at 119
FPS average so it achieves 77% of the
performance of the 2080 ti or 77% of the
maximum potential at 500 to 700 dollars
cheaper depending on what you're buying
the 2060 kayo achieved 62% of the
maximum performance possible at $300
here's the 4k f 1 2019 chart to the 103
FPS average kafirs of the 96 FPS average
on the 3300 AK shows that 3300 AK still
has some overhead it's dealing with the
end result is that overall you could buy
basically any of these GPUs and be
almost fully unconstrained at 4k by the
CPU that's the nature of high
resolutions like this of course again
with more CPU constrained games or with
production applications that leverage
the CPUs more you could end up with an
imbalance for just gaming though the r3
is enough for today's games we'd still
recommend at least one step down from
the 20 atti for better overall system
balance particularly for anyone working
with more than just purely games Red
Dead Redemption 2 is next starting with
1080p in this game the GPU testbench
with the 8086 K has a 21% higher
performance ceiling than the 3300 acts
with a 2080 ti and that illustrates that
the 2080 TI is kneecapped in a
significant fashion this game is making
more even use of the threads and of the
frequency so you have to consider both
aspect and you should consider the 2070
subra to be more of the proper maximum
fully leverage to support tier the lower
tier cards like the 2060 super not
present or the 5600 XT and 2060 KO would
make more sense from an expense
standpoint of the bill
but the 2070 super 10 still get full use
at 1440p the 2080 TI is still
constrained by the 3,300 X now affording
the unconstrained CPU a lead of 9.7% at
104 FPS average this gap has diminished
since it's not the processor speed and
threads limiting Oz but rather the
overhead in the graphics pipeline
scallion is comparable to the other
games where the 2070 super is able to
offer a relatively unconstrained
performance the 2080 TI is around its
max - at this point you shouldn't be too
concerned about buying a GPU that's too
powerful for the CPU at least not
outside of general system and balance
concerns if you only do for example cuda
accelerated tasks so that don't benefit
from threads for work and the rest of
your use is gaming then a higher end GPU
may be well-suited as a combination it
be a bit awkward in pricing and the
balance thereof but you could argue it
4k is a little too challenging to run
with this game already so you'd probably
need to drop the settings if you wanted
a higher resolution for most people we'd
imagine higher settings and lower
resolution maybe a more enjoyable
experience but that's becoming
subjective regardless the hard tap is
about 60 to 66 FPS average the 3300 act
still has some overhead vs. the Intel
parts but this isn't new and is
something we already discussed in our
review of the 3300 x20 atti is fully
enabled here as far as Andy will permit
anyway and is 37% of the 2070 super the
rest of the cards line up like they
would in our GPU task bench
we're not here for absolute FPS numbers
after all but rather a sense of scale
and limitations on the 3,300 X what we
care about more is just the percent
difference between everything and with
that we can see that the 3300 X isn't as
limiting as you might expect total were
three kingdoms on the battle bench mark
is next at 1080p ultra the maximum
possible performance out of the 20 atti
is 117 FPS average which is twelve point
four percent higher than the 3300 X
allows that's still good for the 3300 X
although it does start showing signs of
strain in the disproportionately low
0.1% value at 56 fps indicating more
potential stuttered you probably
shouldn't buy a 20 atti here you
shouldn't anyway but in this instance
we're seeing that there's clearly a
limitation that's not experienced on the
higher-end CPU so you'd be wasting some
of that money the 20 Saudi super isn't
bouncing off of the limits
v20 atti above is the TI leads the super
by about 27% and again beyond this
you're just asking for a straight-up GPU
benchmark since we're no longer CPU bad
this shows that most of the cards can
get relatively full performance out of
the 3,300 X at 1440p of the sealian is
much lower at 77 FPS average and the 1%
0.1% lows are also tighter together the
2070 super performs that so d 2% of the
performance of the 20 80 TI here 4k with
these settings is too constrained to be
viable so you'd have to drop too high to
actually be at a playable FPS on
anything we'll just pop this one up
briefly for 4k the 2080 ti weeds the
2070 super by 43% so the gap is growing
with each resolution hike but it's
obviously synthetic at this point since
we're not at a playable framerate we're
going to call it with this game we have
more games tested but by now we've
established a pattern and it's a waste
of everyone's time to continue repeating
the same information with different
graphics we're here for limitations and
sense of scale not necessarily for per
game performance optimization so we've
gotten what we need in this scenario
with GTA 5 at 1080p the 2080 TI is
getting cats so the maximum difference
between 220 atti and the 2070 super on
the 3300 X is only 17% still high but
not as high as some of the other titles
once again you don't need to worry too
much about how can strain the GPU will
be by the CPU at least not today
but the 2080 TI is still the one that's
more limited than you would see in for
example 2070 super so the awkward thing
here again is that technically in
several of these instances the 2080 ti
isn't really that constricted in this
performance but in the places it is
you're looking at potentially 20% plus
gaps and the worse not worst but
worst-case scenarios worst case scenario
it's a big bit bigger difference than
that but 20% 17% whatever it may be
you're cutting off enough of the 20 atti
performance Headroom that you're paying
for a whole hell of a lot that you're
paying for that it doesn't really make
sense to buy and of course practically
you're talking about a $1,250 GPU with
$120 CPU most people who can afford
$1,250 GPU to begin with can probably
also
for a $200 CPU to go with it in the
least because now you're just talking
about sense of scale of how much money a
person has and that's typically how it
goes so realistically a 20 70 super -
although not tested we can extrapolate
relatively easily it's between a 20 80 I
and a Saudi Saudi super a twenty eighty
super would also be fine
these aren't parts we would recommend
you buy within 30 300 X there's going to
be instances where with games that are
more CPU constrained for example if we
ran these parts through our CPU test
bench with the CPU settings what you'll
end up with is a CPU constraint much
sooner so the time this would become
valid is if you are perhaps a player who
is hunting for higher framerate if you
want really high FPS let's say you're
playing csgo or some other competitive
game like that now you're talking about
a demand for 144 200 240 FPS and at that
point the CPU is going to matter hell of
a lot because it's also doing work to
make those frames so if we're talking
typically a player who is going to try
and get higher graphics settings more
visual fidelity as you may call it and
you're not really looking for those
super high frame rates may be in the
hundreds that's kind of a max with 1080p
ish 1440p sometimes then the 3300 X is
fine but if you're talking competitive
high frame rate reliably in low GPU load
titles then go look at the Seaview
benchmark because that's more relevant
to you and you should probably be buying
something like a 99 hundred K or similar
if it's in the budget so that oh
actually should be waiting for the ten
series which is coming out very soon you
shouldn't probably should not be buying
a CPU from Intel right now because they
have new launches so close but yeah
that'll cap it socket survivability
helps on the 500 series chipset boards
as you could always swap the CPU later
and get an extra architectural
generation but even still 3,300 X to the
top of the 3000 series stack that's
pretty big jump
so yeah paradigm shift with the normal
method of keeping the CPU and upgrading
the GPU might kind of switch with this
one and you could grow into it the other
way so imbalance between the pricing is
something to be concerned about or care
for love but limiting your GPS
performance too much with the CPU with a
bias towards higher graphic settings
you'll be fine again
bias towards higher FPS go look at the
other benchmarks and that's it for this
one so thanks for watching subscribe for
more go to store documents access net to
support this type of work and our
independent research or you can go to
patreon.com/scishow Nexus we'll see you
all next time